---
layout: post
date:   2021-11-07
image: "/remapping-algeria-sp2021/images/grandpre-fanoncollage.gif"
title:  "Connaissez-vous la Rue Frantz Fanon: A Cartographic Collage"
author: "Tyler Grand Pre"
---
#Connaissez-vous la Rue Frantz Fanon: A Cartographic Collage  

>Où me situer? Ou, si vous préférez: où me fourrer?
> - *Peau noire, masques blancs*

Born in colonial Martinique, educated in metropolitan France, buried (twice) in Algeria--I reduce the life of psychologist, militant thinker, and Algerian revolutionary Frantz Fanon to three territories to continue the work of re-historicizing him. Somewhat buried in myth, Fanon’s work is often decontextualized for the purposes of a variety of national causes and evolving fields of the academy. How should you read the colonial/<q>post<q>-colonial legacy of Frantz Fanon in the overlapping urban imaginary and infrastructure of French territories and former colonies? What is it to map and unmap Fanon? These are some of the questions I had in mind as I compared the various rues, avenues, and allées Frantz Fanon in Algiers, France, Martinique, Guadeloupe, French Guiana, and Nigeria.  

The first map, which takes some inspiration from Kathrine Swchab and National Geographic’s work on [<q>The Thousand Streets Named After Martin Luther King Jr<q>](https://www.fastcompany.com/90166768/mapping-the-thousands-of-streets-named-after-martin-luther-king-jr) as well as Neil Freeman’s [<q>Street Grids,<q>](http://fakeisthenewreal.org/street-grids/) is an almost heterotopic collage of streets named after Fanon from two or three areas in Algeria, France, and Martinique. I made it into a gif because I wanted to visualize the layering in a way that becomes progressively harder to read and compare. I chose only these three territories because they represent major sites in Fanon’s life as an intellectual and radical thinker--his birth place in Martinique whose racist, colonial reality features heavily in *Peau noire, masques blancs*; The Parisian streets and banlieues where Fanon very well might have been addressed in *petit nègre* or hailed and dissected by a <q>Tiens, un nègre<q>; and the Algerian infrastructure that features in Fanon’s diagnosis of <q>Le monde colonial [comme] un monde compartimenté<q> ( 28). What we find across all three territories, besides the occasion to compare their distinct historical sites/moments that make up the legacy of such an itinerant life, is a tension between official and popular narratives of history and national identity that are played out through the social relations and practices of urban memory. While the one can be conventionally mapped, the other has to be drawn out of the discursive tensions that arise when we interrogate the streets named after Frantz Fanon through the evolution of his theoretical, political, and personal relationship to these built and social environments.  

#Avenue du Docteur Frantz Fanon, El Djazair, Algeria  

![Territorial Profile of Bobigny, France]
(/remapping-algeria-sp2021/images/grandpre-bobignyprofile.gif)
